‎Work constructing
the new Britain branch offices
‎is well under way.
‎A theocratic project of this size
‎is no small task;
‎it involves challenges.
‎What were some of those challenges?
‎How do those involved feel,
‎and what could we learn from that?
‎The branch facility is an unusual entity
‎​—a mixture of volunteers working
and living all on one property.
‎That doesn’t occur very often, if ever.
‎The common thread that people told us​
‎—planning officers or counselors​—
‎when we made inquiries
about a specific site was,
‎“You will never get a site anywhere in Britain
‎where you get that combination
in one planning application.”
‎From a human viewpoint,
‎it was just a complete conflict of normal criteria.
‎We searched the country far and wide
to try to find a council
‎that was keen to follow the model
that was needed for Bethel.
‎Amazingly, after almost three years
‎of searching for suitable properties,
‎having looked at over 300 sites,
‎we only came up with 3 that met the criteria.
‎It was in 2011
that we looked at a site
‎in the Essex area;
it was a disused hospital.
‎That came to nothing
because it was developed as residential,
‎but it did eventually introduce us
to the Chelmsford Council.
‎And then the planning authorities said,
‎“Well, we can’t help you with that one,
‎but have you thought about this one?”
‎The brothers
were looking everywhere they could,
‎but this was, in effect, an invisible site.
‎It was a site that we hadn’t even looked at
and wasn’t even on our radar,
‎so this is another area where we felt
that Jehovah’s hand was evident.
‎The development on that site
was already approved
‎for 69,300 square meters (745,939 sq ft)
‎and our brief
was 70,000 square meters (753,474 sq ft).
‎Having looked at so many other sites,
‎where some doors would open
but others would remain shut,
‎to then come across a property, a site,
‎where all the doors opened,
you knew this was different.
‎You knew this was the right one.
‎Another aspect of the work
‎that was done to secure the site
‎was that there were a lot
of peripheral properties, which were strategic
‎and were useful to us in setting up site works
‎and in perhaps removing potential opposition
‎to our planning application.
‎For construction reasons, we needed staging;
‎we needed accommodations;
‎we needed access points;
we needed a buffer.
‎Those properties became available
‎just where we needed them
and when we needed them.
‎It seemed that every single one
of them had a reason why
‎they were contemplating selling at that time.
‎So it wasn’t just the branch property itself;
‎it was all the facilitating properties around it
‎becoming available at the same time.
‎Again, it was remarkable
​—unprecedented!
‎None of them were actually on the market.
‎I see that too as another evidence
of Jehovah’s blessing.
‎A principal issue in the negotiation
‎was the issue of contamination.
‎I was stunned
‎with the absolute chaos
and mess that it was.
‎So we negotiated
‎a reduction in the purchase price.
‎The way the negotiations went
‎was evidence to me of Jehovah’s hand.
‎We had a specialist company
do a full survey of the site,
‎and they commented that there is a barrier
‎of clay across the whole site.
‎If it would have been chalk
‎or limestone or sandstone,
‎we wouldn’t be able to build
on that property.
‎There were a lot of obstacles to overcome,
‎and those were overcome little by little.
‎But we started to see Jehovah’s hand
‎as seemingly impossible obstacles
began to be removed.
‎Psalm 127:1 says:
‎“Unless Jehovah builds the house,
‎it is in vain
that [the] builders work hard on it.”
‎Seeing Jehovah’s direction firsthand
through the various phases
‎convinces us that the success of this project
‎is not dependent on favorable circumstances,
‎the skill of the workers,
‎or even the hard work of those involved.
‎Building this new branch is only possible
because of Jehovah’s blessing.